google finance academy 1
By Brian Tayan
january 8, 2019
The wells fargo cross-selling
scandal
Stanford Closer LOOK series
introduction
In recent years, more attention has been paid to corporate
culture and “tone at the top,” and the impact that these have on
organizational outcomes. While corporate leaders and outside
observers contend that culture is a critical contributor to
employee engagement, motivation, and performance, the nature
of this relationship and the mechanisms for instilling the desired
values in employee conduct is not well understood.
	 For example, a survey by Deloitte finds that 94 percent
of executives believe that workplace culture is important to
business success, and 62 percent believe that “clearly defined
and communicated core values and beliefs” are important.1
Graham, Harvey, Popadak, and Rajgopal (2016) find evidence
that governance practices and financial incentives can reinforce
culture; however, they also find that incentives can work in
opposition to culture, particularly when they “reward employees
for achieving a metric without regard to the actions they took to
achieve that metric.” According to a participant in their study,
“People invariably will do what you pay them to do even when
you’re saying something different.”2
	 The tensions between corporate culture, financial incentives,
and employee conduct is illustrated by the Wells Fargo crossselling scandal.
Wells Fargo Culture, Values, and Management
Wells Fargo has long had a reputation for sound management.
The company used its financial strength to purchase Wachovia
during the height of the financial crisis—forming what is now the
third-largest bank in the country by assets—and emerged from
the ensuing recession largely unscathed, with operating and stock
price performance among the top of its peer group (see Exhibit 1).
Fortune magazine praised Wells Fargo for “a history of avoiding
the rest of the industry’s dumbest mistakes.”3 American Banker
called Wells Fargo “the big bank least tarnished by the scandals
and reputational crises.”4 In 2013, it named Chairman and CEO
John Stumpf “Banker of the Year.”5 Carrie Tolstedt, who ran the
company’s vast retail banking division, was named the “Most
Powerful Woman in Banking.”6 In 2015, Wells Fargo ranked 7th
on Barron’s list of “Most Respected Companies.”7
Wells Fargo’s success is built on a cultural and economic model
that combines deep customer relations with an actively engaged
sales culture. The company’s operating philosophy includes the
following elements:
Vision and values. Wells Fargo’s vision is to “satisfy our
customers’ needs, and help them succeed financially.” The
company emphasizes that:
Our vision has nothing to do with transactions, pushing products,
or getting bigger for the sake of bigness. It’s about building lifelong
relationships one customer at a time. … We strive to be recognized
by our stakeholders as setting the standard among the world’s great
companies for integrity and principled performance. This is more
than just doing the right thing. We also have to do it in the right
way.8
The company takes these statements seriously. According to
Stumpf, “[Our vision] is at the center of our culture, it’s important
to our success, and frankly, it’s been probably the most significant
contributor to our long-term performance.”9 … “If I have any one
job here, it’s keeper for the culture.”10
Cross-selling. The more products that a customer has with
Wells Fargo, the more information the bank has on that customer,
allowing for better decisions about credit, products, and pricing.
Customers with multiple products are also significantly more
profitable (see Exhibit 2). According to Stumpf:
To succeed at it [cross-selling], you have to do a thousand things
right. It requires long-term persistence, significant investment
in systems and training, proper team member incentives and
recognition, [and] taking the time to understand your customers’
financial objectives.11
Conservative, stable management. Stumpf’s senior
management team consisted of 11 direct reports with an average
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2879102
The Wells Fargo Cross-Selling Scandal
Google finance academy 2
of 27 years of experience at Wells Fargo.12 Decisions are made
collectively. According to former CEO Richard Kovacevich, “No
single person has ever run Wells Fargo and no single person
probably ever will. It’s a team game here.”13 Although the company
maintains independent risk and oversight mechanisms, all senior
leaders are responsible for ensuring that proper practices are
embedded in their divisions:
The most important thing that we talk about inside the company
right now is that the lever that we have to manage our reputation
is to stick to our vision and values. If we are doing things for our
customers that are the right things, then the company is going to be
in very good shape. … We always consider the reputational impact
of the things that we do. There is no manager at Wells Fargo who
is responsible for reputation risk. All of our business managers in
all of our lines of business are responsible.14
Wells Fargo has been listed among Gallup’s “Great Places to Work”
for multiple years, with employee engagement scores in the top
quintile of U.S. companies.
cross-selling scandal
In 2013, rumors circulated that Wells Fargo employees in Southern
California were engaging in aggressive tactics to meet their
daily cross-selling targets.15 According to the Los Angeles Times,
approximately 30 employees were fired for opening new accounts
and issuing debit or credit cards without customer knowledge,
in some cases by forging signatures. “We found a breakdown in
a small number of our team members,” a Wells Fargo spokesman
stated. “Our team members do have goals. And sometimes they
can be blinded by a goal.”16 According to another representative,
“This is something we take very seriously. When we find lapses,
we do something about it, including firing people.”17
Some outside observers alleged that the bank’s practice of
setting daily sales targets put excessive pressure on employees.
Branch managers were assigned quotas for the number and types
of products sold. If the branch did not hit its targets, the shortfall
was added to the next day’s goals. Branch employees were
provided financial incentive to meet cross-sell and customerservice targets, with personal bankers receiving bonuses up to 15
to 20 percent of their salary and tellers receiving up to 3 percent.
	 Tim Sloan, at the time chief financial officer of Wells Fargo,
refuted criticism of the company’s sales system: “I’m not aware of
any overbearing sales culture.”18 Wells Fargo had multiple controls
in place to prevent abuse. Employee handbooks explicitly stated
that “splitting a customer deposit and opening multiple accounts
for the purpose of increasing potential incentive compensation is
considered a sales integrity violation.”19 The company maintained
an ethics program to instruct bank employees on spotting and
addressing conflicts of interest. It also maintained a whistleblower
hotline to notify senior management of violations. Furthermore,
the senior management incentive system had protections consistent
with best practices for minimizing risk, including bonuses tied to
instilling the company’s vision and values in its culture, bonuses
tied to risk management, prohibitions against hedging or pledging
equity awards, hold-past retirement provisions for equity awards,
and numerous triggers for clawbacks and recoupment of bonuses
in cases where they were inappropriately earned (see Exhibit 3). Of
note, cross-sales and products-per-household were not included
as specific performance metrics in senior executive bonus
calculations even though they were for branch-level employees.20
	 In the end, these protections were not sufficient to stem a
problem that proved to be more systemic and intractable than
senior management realized. In September 2016, Wells Fargo
announced that it would pay $185 million to settle a lawsuit filed
by regulators and the city and county of Los Angeles, admitting
that employees had opened as many as 2 million accounts without
customer authorization over a five-year period.21 Although
large, the fine was smaller than penalties paid by other financial
institutions to settle crisis-era violations. Wells Fargo stock
price fell 2 percent on the news (see Exhibit 4). Richard Cordray,
director of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, criticized
the bank for failing to
… monitor its program carefully, allowing thousands of employees
to game the system and inflate their sales figures to meet their sales
targets and claim higher bonuses under extreme pressure. Rather
than put its customers first, Wells Fargo built and sustained a
cross-selling program where the bank and many of its employees
served themselves instead, violating the basic ethics of a banking
institution including the key norm of trust.22
A Wells Fargo spokesman responded that, “We never want products,
including credit lines, to be opened without a customer’s consent
and understanding. In rare situations when a customer tells us
they did not request a product they have, our practice is to close it
and refund any associated fees.”23 In a release, the banks said that,
“Wells Fargo is committed to putting our customers’ interests first
100 percent of the time, and we regret and take responsibility for
any instances where customers may have received a product that
they did not request.”24
The bank announced a number of actions and remedies,
several of which had been put in place in preceding years. The
company hired an independent consulting firm to review all
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2879102
The Wells Fargo Cross-Selling Scandal
Google finance academy 3
account openings since 2011 to identify potentially unauthorized
accounts. $2.6 million was refunded to customers for fees
associated with those accounts. 5,300 employees were terminated
over a five-year period.25 Carrie Tolstedt, who led the retail
banking division, retired. Wells Fargo eliminated product sales
goals and reconfigured branch-level incentives to emphasize
customer service rather than cross-sell metrics.26 The company
also developed new procedures for verifying account openings
and introduced additional training and control mechanisms to
prevent violations.27
Nevertheless, in subsequent weeks, senior management
and the board of directors struggled to find a balance between
recognizing the severity of the bank’s infractions, admitting fault,
and convincing the public that the problem was contained. They
emphasized that the practice of opening unauthorized accounts
was confined to a small number of employees: “99 percent of the
people were getting it right, 1 percent of people in community
banking were not. … It was people trying to meet minimum goals
to hang on to their jobs.”28 They also asserted that these actions
were not indicative of the broader culture:
I want to make very clear that we never directed nor wanted our
team members to provide products and services to customers that
they did not want. That is not good for our customers and that is
not good for our business. It is against everything we stand for as
a company.29
If [employees] are not going to do the thing that we ask them to
do—put customers first, honor our vision and values—I don’t want
them here. I really don’t. … The 1 percent that did it wrong, who
we fired, terminated, in no way reflects our culture nor reflects the
great work the other vast majority of the people do. That’s a false
narrative.30
They also pointed out that the financial impact to the customer
and the bank was extremely limited. Of the 2 million potentially
unauthorized accounts, only 115,000 incurred fees; those fees
totaled $2.6 million, or an average of $25 per account, which the
bank had refunded. Affected customers did not react negatively:
We’ve had very, very low volumes of customer reaction since that
happened. … We sent 115,000 letters out to people saying that you
may have a product that you didn’t want and here is the refund of
any fees that you incurred as a result of it. And we got very little
feedback from that as well.31
The practice also did not have a material impact on the company’s
overall cross-sell ratios, increasing the reported metric by a
maximum of 0.02 products per household.32 According to one
executive, “The story line is worse than the economics at this
point.”33
	 Nevertheless, although the financial impact was trivial, the
reputational damage proved to be enormous. When CEO John
Stumpf appeared before the U.S. Senate, the narrative of the
scandal changed significantly. Senators criticized the company for
perpetuating fraud on its customers, putting excessive pressure
on low-level employees, and failing to hold senior management
responsible. In particular, they were sharply critical that the board
of directors had not clawed back significant pay from John Stumpf
or former retail banking head Carrie Tolstedt, who retired earlier
in the summer with a pay package valued at $124.6 million.34
Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts told Stumpf:
You know, here’s what really gets me about this, Mr. Stumpf.
If one of your tellers took a handful of $20 bills out of the cash
drawer, they’d probably be looking at criminal charges for theft.
They could end up in prison. But you squeezed your employees to
the breaking point so they would cheat customers and you could
drive up the value of your stock and put hundreds of millions of
dollars in your own pocket. And when it all blew up, you kept your
job, you kept your multimillion dollar bonuses, and you went on
television to blame thousands of $12-an-hour employees who were
just trying to meet cross-sell quotas that made you rich. This is
about accountability. You should resign. You should give back the
money that you took while this scam was going on, and you should
be criminally investigated by both the Department of Justice and
the Securities and Exchange Commission.35
Following the hearings, the board of directors announced that
it hired external counsel Shearman & Sterling to conduct an
independent investigation of the matter. Stumpf was asked to
forfeit $41 million and Tolstedt $19 million in outstanding,
unvested equity awards. It was one of the largest clawbacks of
CEO pay in history and the largest of a financial institution. The
board stipulated that additional clawbacks might occur. Neither
executive would receive a bonus for 2016, and Stumpf agreed to
forgo a salary while the investigation was underway.36
Two weeks later, Stumpf resigned without explanation. He
received no severance and reiterated a commitment not to sell
shares during the investigation. The company announced that
it would separate the chairman and CEO roles.37 Tim Sloan,
chief operating officer, became CEO. Lead independent director
Stephen Sanger became nonexecutive chairman; and Elizabeth
Duke, director and former Federal Reserve governor, filled a
newly created position as vice chairman.
Independent Investigation Report
In April 2017, the board of directors released the results of its
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2879102
The Wells Fargo Cross-Selling Scandal
Google finance academy 4
independent investigation which sharply criticized the bank’s
leadership, sales culture, performance systems, and organizational
structure as root causes of the cross-selling scandal (see Exhibit 5).
Performance and incentives. The report faulted the company’s
practice of publishing performance scorecards for creating
“pressure on employees to sell unwanted or unneeded products to
customers and, in some cases, to open unauthorized accounts.”38
Employees “feared being penalized” for failing to meet goals, even
in situations where these goals were unreasonably high:
In many instances, community bank leadership recognized that
their plans were unattainable. They were commonly referred to as
50/50 plans, meaning that there was an expectation that only half
the regions would be able to meet them.
The head of strategic planning for the community bank was
quoted as saying that the goal-setting process is a “balancing act”
and recognized that “low goals cause lower performance and high
goals increase the percentage of cheating.”
The report also blamed management for, “tolerating low
quality accounts as a necessary by-product of a sales-driven
organization.” …
Management characterized these low quality accounts, including
products later canceled or never used and products that the
customer did not want or need, as “slippage” and believed a certain
amount of slippage was the cost of doing business in any retail
environment.
The report faulted management for failing to identify “the
relationship between the goals and bad behavior [even though]
that relationship is clearly seen in the data. As sales goals became
more difficult to achieve, the rate of misconduct rose.” Of note, the
report found that “employees who engaged in misconduct most
frequently associated their behavior with sales pressure, rather
than compensation incentives.”
Organizational structure. In addition, the report asserted that
“corporate control functions were constrained by [a] decentralized
organizational structure” and described the corporate control
functions as maintaining “a culture of substantial deference to the
business units.”
Group risk leaders “took the lead in assessing and addressing
risk within their business units” and yet were “answerable
principally to the heads of their businesses.” For example, the
community bank group risk officer reported directly to the head
of the community bank and only on a dotted-line basis to the
central chief risk officer. As a result,
Risk management … generally took place in the lines of business,
with the business people and the group risk officers and their staffs
as the “first line of defense.”
John Stumpf believed that this system “better managed risk
by spreading decision-making and produced better business
decisions because they were made closer to the customer.”39
The board report also criticized control functions for not
understanding the systemic nature of sales practice violations:
Certain of the control functions often adopted a narrow
“transactional” approach to issues as they arose. They focused
on the specific employee complaint or individual lawsuit that
was before them, missing opportunities to put them together in a
way that might have revealed sales practice problems to be more
significant and systemic than was appreciated.
The chief operational risk officer
did not view sales practices or compensation issues as within
her mandate, but as the responsibility of the lines of businesses
and other control functions (the law department, HR, audit and
investigations). She viewed sales gaming as a known problem that
was well-managed, contained and small.
The legal department focused
principally on quantifiable monetary costs—damages, fines,
penalties, restitution. Confident those costs would be relatively
modest, the law department did not appreciate that sales integrity
issues reflected a systemic breakdown.
Human resources
had a great deal of information recorded in its systems, [but] it
had not developed the means to consolidate information on sales
practices issues and to report on them.
The internal audit department
generally found that processes and controls designed to detect,
investigate and remediate sales practice violations were effective
at mitigating sales practices-related risks. … As a general matter,
however, audit did not attempt to determine the root cause of
unethical sales practices.
The report concluded that
while the advisability of centralization was subject to considerable
disagreement within Wells Fargo, events show that a strong
centralized risk function is most suited to the effective management
of risk.
Leadership. Furthermore, the board report criticized CEO
John Stumpf and community banking head Carrie Tolstedt for
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2879102
The Wells Fargo Cross-Selling Scandal
Google finance academy 5
leadership failures.
According to the report, Stumpf did not appreciate the scope
and scale of sales practices violations: “Stumpf’s commitment to
the sales culture … led him to minimize problems with it, even
when plausibly brought to his attention.” For example, he did
not react negatively to learning that 1 percent of employees were
terminated in 2013 for sales practices violations: “In his view, the
fact that 1 percent of Wells Fargo employees were terminated
meant that 99 percent of employees were doing their jobs
correctly.” Consistent with this, the report found that Stumpf “was
not perceived within Wells Fargo as someone who wanted to hear
bad news or deal with conflict.”
The report acknowledged the contribution that Tolstedt made
to the bank’s financial performance:
She was credited with the community bank’s strong financial
results over the years, and was perceived as someone who ran a
“tight ship” with everything “buttoned down.” Community bank
employee engagement and customer satisfaction surveys reinforced
the positive view of her leadership and management. Stumpf had
enormous respect for Tolstedt’s intellect, work ethic, acumen and
discipline, and thought she was the “most brilliant” community
banker he had ever met.
At the same time, it was critical of her management style, describing
her as “obsessed with control, especially of negative information
about the community bank” and faulting her for maintaining “an
‘inner circle’ of staff that supported her, reinforced her views, and
protected her.” She “resisted and rejected the near-unanimous
view of senior regional bank leaders that the sales goals were
unreasonable and led to negative outcomes and improper
behavior.”
Tolstedt and certain of her inner circle were insular and defensive
and did not like to be challenged or hear negative information.
Even senior leaders within the Community Bank were frequently
afraid of or discouraged from airing contrary views.
Stumpf “was aware of Tolstedt’s shortcomings as a leader
but also viewed her as having significant strengths.” … He “was
accepting of Tolstedt’s flaws in part because of her other strengths
and her ability to drive results, including cross-sell.”
Board of Directors. Finally, the report evaluated the process
by which the board of directors oversaw sales-practice violations
and concluded that “the board was regularly engaged on the issue;
however, management reports did not accurately convey the
scope of the problem.” The report found that
Tolstedt effectively challenged and resisted scrutiny from both
within and outside the community bank. She and her group risk
officer not only failed to escalate issues outside the community
bank, but also worked to impede such escalation. … Tolstedt
never voluntarily escalated sales practice issues, and when called
upon specifically to do so, she and the community bank provided
reports that were generalized, incomplete, and viewed by many as
misleading.
Following the initial Los Angeles Times article highlighting potential
violations, “sales practices” was included as a “noteworthy risk”
in reports to the full board and the board’s risk committee.
Beginning in 2014 and continuing thereafter, the board received
reports from the community bank, the corporate risk office,
and corporate human resources that “sales practice issues were
receiving scrutiny and attention and, by early 2015, that the risks
associated with them had decreased.”
Board members expressed the view that “they were
misinformed” by a presentation made to the risk committee in May
2015 that underreported the number of employees terminated
for sales-practice violations, that reports made by Tolstedt to the
committee in October 2015 “minimized and understated” the
problem, and that metrics in these reports suggested that potential
abuses were “subsiding.”
Following the lawsuit by the Los Angeles City Attorney, the
board hired a third-party consultant to investigate sales practices
and conduct an analysis of potential customer harm. The board
did not learn the total number of employees terminated for
violations until it was included in the settlement agreement in
September 2016.
Wells Fargo response. With the release of the report, Wells
Fargo announced a series of steps to centralize and strengthen
control functions. The board also announced that it would claw
back an additional $47.3 million in outstanding stock option
awards from Tolstedt and an additional $28 million in previously
vested equity awards from Stumpf.40
Long-term Overhang
The board report and related actions did not put an end to
shareholder and regulatory pressure. At the company’s 2017
annual meeting, 9 of the company’s 15 directors received less than
75 percent support and 4 received less than 60 percent, including
board chairman Stephen Sanger (56 percent), head of the risk
committee Enrique Hernandez (53 percent), head of the corporate
responsibility committee Federico Peña (54 percent), and Cynthia
Milligan who headed the credit committee (57 percent).41 The
bank subsequently announced the resignations of 6 directors,
including Sanger, who was replaced by Elizabeth Duke as board
chair.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2879102
The Wells Fargo Cross-Selling Scandal
Google finance academy 6
Wells Fargo continued its efforts to reexamine all aspects of
its business. In August 2017, the company increased its estimate
of the number of potentially unauthorized consumer accounts to
3.5 million and issued an additional $2.8 million in refunds.42 The
bank also announced that it identified sales practice violations in
both its auto and mortgage lending divisions. In February 2018,
citing “widespread consumer abuses,” the Federal Reserve Board
took the unprecedented action of placing a strict limit on the
company’s asset size, forbidding the bank from growing past the
$1.95 trillion in assets it had at year end until it demonstrated an
improvement in corporate controls. According to Federal Reserve
Board Chair Janet Yellen:
We cannot tolerate pervasive and persistent misconduct at any
bank and the consumers harmed by Wells Fargo expect that robust
and comprehensive reforms will be put in place to make certain
that the abuses do not occur again. The enforcement action we are
taking today will ensure that Wells Fargo will not expand until it
is able to do so safely and with the protections needed to manage all
of its risks and protect its customers.43
In April 2018, the bank agreed to a $1 billion settlement with
the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau and the Office of
the Comptroller of the Currency to resolve auto and mortgage
lending violations. Two weeks later it agreed to pay $480 million
to settle a securities class action lawsuit over cross-selling. In
December 2018, the company settled with 50 state attorneys
general to resolve civil claims for cross-selling, auto lending, and
mortgage lending violations and agreed to pay $575 million.
why this matters
1. The Wells Fargo compensation system emphasized crossselling as a performance metric for awarding incentive pay to
employees. The company also published scorecards that ranked
individual branches on sales metrics, including cross-selling.
Was the company wrong to use cross-selling as a metric in its
incentive systems? Would the program have worked better if
structured differently? The independent report suggests that
employee pressure was a greater contributor to misconduct
than financial incentives. Is this assessment correct?
2. Branch-level employees were incentivized to increase products
per household but the senior-executive bonus system did not
include this metric. Did this disconnect contribute to a failure
to recognize the problem earlier?
3. Wells Fargo prides itself on its vision and values and culture.
By several measures, these have been highly beneficial to the
company’s performance. What factors should senior executives
consider to ensure that compensation and performance
systems encourage the achievement of company objectives
without compromising culture?
4.	 The dollars involved in the Wells Fargo cross-selling scandal
were small (less than $6 million in direct fees) but the
reputational damage to the bank was massive. How can a
company prepare against problems that do not seem to be
“material” in a financial sense but ultimately have a material
impact on the business and its reputation?
5. The independent investigation concludes that “a strong
centralized risk function is most suited to the effective
management of risk.” Is this conclusion correct? What steps can
executives in a decentralized organization take to minimize
gaps in oversight without creating unnecessary bureaucracy?
6. The Wells Fargo cross-selling scandal highlights the challenge
of a high-performing executive whose behavior ultimately does
not align with company values. How much autonomy should
high-performing executives be afforded? How can a company
balance autonomy and accountability?
7. The independent investigation largely exonerates the Wells
Fargo board of directors. How much blame does the board
deserve? What could it have done differently to prevent the
cross-selling issue from snowballing?
8. Wells Fargo had the elements in place of a properly functioning
governance system, including risk management, audit, legal,
and human resources. Furthermore, each of these groups was—
at least to some degree—aware of sales practice violations in
the consumer bank. And yet no one recognized the systemic
nature of the problem or took the necessary steps to address
it. How can a company gauge whether its governance
system is effective in identifying and mitigating risk? 
1 Deloitte, “Core Beliefs and Culture: Chairman’s Survey Findings,”
(2012).
2 John R. Graham, Campbell R. Harvey, Jillian Popadak, and Shiva
Rajgopal, “Corporate Culture: Evidence from the Field,” Social Science
Research Network (2016).
3 Adam Lashinsky, “Riders on the Storm,” Fortune (May 4, 2009).
4 Maria Aspan, “Wells Fargo’s John Stumpf, the 2013 Banker of the Year,”
American Banker (Nov. 21, 2013).
5 Ibid.
6 Tolstedt was named to the list continuously from 2003 to 2015 and
named number 1 in 2010. See Sara Lepro, “Wells’ Tolstedt at Top of
Power List,” American Banker (Sep. 27, 2010).
7 Vito J. Racanelli, “Apple Tops Barron’s List of Respected Companies,”
Barron’s (Jun. 27, 2015).
8 Wells Fargo’s Vision & Values was written in booklet form in the early
1990s and is distributed to all employees. See Wells Fargo, “The Vision
and Values of Wells Fargo,” (Accessed Nov. 1, 2016).
9 “Wells Fargo & Co. at Goldman Sachs U.S. Financial Services
Conference,” CQ FD Disclosure (Dec. 8, 2015).
10 Maria Aspan, loc. cit.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2879102
The Wells Fargo Cross-Selling Scandal
Google finance academy 7
11 Wells Fargo, 2010 Annual Report.
12 Wells Fargo, “Wells Fargo & Co. 2016 Investor Day,” CQ FD Disclosure
(May 24, 2016).
13 Maria Aspan, loc. cit.
14 Pat Callahan, Executive Vice President, “Wells Fargo & Company 2010
Investor Conference,” CQ FD Disclosure (May 14, 2010).
15 There is some evidence that employees were discussing sales pressure
on social media sites, such as Glassdoor, as far back as 2010; however,
the frequency is modest (less than 10 percent of employee reviews).
Research by the author.
16 E. Scott Reckard, “Wells Fargo Fires Workers Accused of Cheating on
Sales Goals,” Los Angeles Times (Oct. 3, 2013).
17 E. Scott Reckard, “Wells Fargo’s Pressure-Cooker Sales Culture Comes
at a Cost,” Los Angeles Times (Dec. 21, 2013).
18 Ibid.
19 Cited in Emily Glazer, “How Wells Fargo’s High-Pressure Sales Culture
Spiraled Out of Control,” The Wall Street Journal (Sep. 16, 2016).
20	Wells Fargo, Form DEF-14A (Mar. 16, 2016).
21	The fine comprised of $100 million to the Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau, $35 million to the Office of Comptroller of the
Currency, and $50 million to the city and county of Los Angeles. In
addition, the bank refunded customers for fees they incurred on these
accounts. Accounts included deposit accounts, checking accounts, debit
cards, and credit cards. The lawsuit was first filed in 2015. James Rufus
Koren, “Wells Fargo to Pay $185 Million Settlement for ‘Outrageous’
Sales Culture,” Los Angeles Times (Sep. 8, 2016).
22 “Full Committee Hearing on ‘An Examination of Wells Fargo’s
Unauthorized Accounts and the Regulatory Response,” Federal News
Service (Sep. 20, 2016).
23 Emily Glazer, “Wells Fargo to Pay $185 Million Fine Over Account
Openings,” The Wall Street Journal (Sep. 8, 2016).
24 Wells Fargo press release, “Wells Fargo Issues Statement on Agreement
Related to Sales Practices,” BusinessWire (Sep. 8, 2016).
25 This represented 1 percent per year of the approximately 100,000
Wells Fargo employees working in retail branches. 10 percent of the
terminated employees were at the manager level or above. The review
was subsequently expanded to include 2009 and 2010.
26 Emily Glazer “Can This Woman Save Wells Fargo’s Consumer Banking
Business?” The Wall Street Journal (Oct. 19, 2016).
27 Wells Fargo press release, (Sep. 8, 2016), loc. cit.
28 CFO John Shrewsberry in “Wells Fargo’s (WFC) Management Presents
at Barclays Global Financial Services Conference (Transcript),” Seeking
Alpha (Sep. 13, 2016).
29 CEO John Stumpf in “Full Committee Hearing on ‘An Examination of
Wells Fargo’s Unauthorized Accounts and the Regulatory Response,’”
Federal News Service (Sep. 20, 2016).
30 CEO John Stumpf in Emily Glazer and Christina Rexrode, “Wells Boss
Says Staff at Fault for Scams,” The Wall Street Journal (Sep. 14, 2016).
31 CFO John Shrewsberry in “Wells Fargo’s (WFC) Management Presents
at Barclays Global Financial Services Conference (Transcript),” loc. cit.
32 According to CEO Timothy Sloan, “Let me clarify that these accounts
had a de minimis impact to the retail banking household cross-sell ratio
that we report on a quarterly basis, with the maximum impact in any one
quarter of 0.02 products per household or 0.3% of the reported metric.
At no time were all of the identified accounts included in our reported
cross-sell ratio because unused deposit accounts rolled off.” See “Wells
Fargo & Company’s (WFC) CEO Timothy Sloan on Q3 2016 Results—
Earnings Call Transcript,” Seeking Alpha (Oct. 14, 2016).
33	CFO John Shrewsberry in Emily Glazer, “Wells Maps a Crisis Plan—
Executives Say Bank’s Situation Will Get Harder Before It Gets Better
After Scandal,” The Wall Street Journal (Oct. 12, 2016).
34 Note that the majority of this compensation represented equity-awards
accrued over her 27 year tenure with the company and were subject
to the company’s hold-past-retirement policy. See Exhibit 3 and Wells
Fargo, Form 8-K (Jul. 12, 2016).
35 “Full Committee Hearing on ‘An Examination of Wells Fargo’s
Unauthorized Accounts and the Regulatory Response,’” loc. cit.
36 Wells Fargo press release, “Independent Directors of Wells Fargo
Conducting Investigation of Retail Banking Sales Practices and Related
Matters,” BusinessWire (Sep. 28, 2016).
37 For more information on the impact of separating the chairman and
CEO roles see: David F. Larcker and Brian Tayan, “Chairman and CEO:
The Controversy Over Board Leadership Structure,” Stanford Closer
Look Series ( Jun. 24, 2016); and David F. Larcker and Brian Tayan,
“Independent Chairman,” Stanford Quick Guide Series: Research
Spotlight (Nov. 2015).
38	Unless otherwise specified, quotations in this section are derived from:
“Independent Director of the Board of Wells Fargo & Company: Sales
Practices Investigation Report,” (April 10, 2017), available at: https://
www.wellsfargo.com/assets/pdf/about/investor-relations/
presentations/2017/board-report.pdf. Edited lightly for clarity or
grammar.
39 Senior executives separately have noted that decentralization is an
important element of the company’s credit culture and has allowed the
company to record lower credit losses over multiple economic cycles
because small dollar loans are made faster and closer to the customer.
Interview with the author May 2, 2018.
40 Wells Fargo press release, “Wells Fargo Board Releases Findings of
Independent Investigation of Retail Banking Sales Practices and Related
Matters,” BusinessWire (Apr. 10, 2017).
41	Average support in an uncontested director election is 94 percent.
According to Institutional Shareholder Services, over the 10 year
period 2007-2016, approximately 22 directors per year among all S&P
500 companies received less than 60 percent support, on average. See
Emily Glazer, “Wells Fargo Directors Face Shareholders’ Ire,” The Wall
Street Journal (April 26, 2017); and Wells Fargo press release, “Wells
Fargo Announces Preliminary Voting Results of 2017 Annual Meeting,”
BusinessWire (April 25, 2017).
42 The additional accounts resulted from an increase in the scope of
the years covered, from January 2009 to September 2016. The bank
noted that its estimate was conservative and likely included properly
authorized accounts: “The analysis was data-driven and looked at
account usage patterns. Since usage patterns of some authorized
accounts opened with a customer’s consent can be similar to some
unauthorized accounts, it is likely that some properly authorized
accounts were included in the population identified as unauthorized
accounts.” Wells Fargo press release, “Wells Fargo Reports Completion
of Expanded Third-Party Review of Retail Banking Accounts, Paving
Way to Complete Remediation Effort,” BusinessWire (August 31, 2017).
43 Federal Reserve press release, “Responding to widespread consumer
abuses and compliance breakdowns by Wells Fargo, Federal Reserve
restricts Wells’ growth until firm improves governance and controls.
Concurrent with Fed action, Wells to replace three directors by April,
one by year end,” (February 2, 2018).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2879102
The Wells Fargo Cross-Selling Scandal
Google finance academy 8
Brian Tayan is a researcher with the Corporate Governance Research
Initiative at the Stanford Graduate School of Business and a member of
the Rock Center for Corporate Governance at Stanford University. He
is coauthor of the books Corporate Governance Matters and A Real
Look at Real World Corporate Governance. He would like to
thank Michelle E. Gutman for research assistance in the preparation of
these materials.
The Stanford Closer Look Series is a collection of short case
studies that explore topics, issues, and controversies in corporate
governance and leadership. The Closer Look Series is published
by the Corporate Governance Research Initiative at the Stanford
Graduate School of Business and the Rock Center for Corporate
Governance at Stanford University. For more information, visit:
http:/www.gsb.stanford.edu/cgri-research.
Copyright © 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior
University. All rights reserved.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2879102
The Wells Fargo Cross-Selling Scandal
Google finance academy 9
Exhibit 1 — wells fargo: selected performance metrics
As of March 21, 2016, rounded to the nearest percentage.
total shareholder return
7% 6% 6% 5%
-10%
-20%
-3%
12%
8%
12%
9%
1%
-1%
7%
12%
11%
9%
11%
4%
-2%
7%
Wells
Fargo
JP Morgan US Bank PNC Bank of
America
Citigroup KBW Bank
Avg
Annualized TSR
10 Year
5 Year
3 Year
Relation Between Returns and Volatility
Wells
Fargo
JP Morgan
Citigroup
Bank of America
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
0% 50% 100% 150%
Long-Term
Average ROA
Normalized Standard Deviation of ROA
Based on quarterly results, Q1 2009 through Q4 2015.
Sources: Wells Fargo, Investor Day (May. 24, 2016); Wells Fargo, Credit Suisse Financial Services Forum (Feb. 9, 2016).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2879102
The Wells Fargo Cross-Selling Scandal
Google finance academy 10
Exhibit 2 — Wells Fargo: Cross-Selling Metrics
Note: Shows the relationship between the number of products that a retail banking customer holds with Wells Fargo and the percentage of those customers who
make an additional product purchase from Wells Fargo in the subsequent year.
Relation Between Number of Products per customer and Future Purchases
Retail Banking Profit per Customer
Source: Wells Fargo, Investor Day (May 20, 2014).
12%
52%
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8+
% Customers Purchasing
Additional Product
Products per Customer
1x
3x
5x
10x
3 5 8 10+
Profit per Customer
Products per Customer
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2879102
The Wells Fargo Cross-Selling Scandal
Google finance academy 11
Exhibit 3 — Wells Fargo: Selected Executive Compensation Provisions
Note: Edited slightly for length.
Source: Wells Fargo, Form DEF-14A (Mar. 16, 2016).
Policy / Provision Requirement / Trigger
Executive Officer Stock
Ownership Policy
Until one year following retirement, our executive officers must hold shares
equal to at least 50% of the after-tax profit shares (assuming a 50% tax
rate) acquired upon the exercise of options or vesting of RSRs [Restricted
Share Rights] and Performance Shares, subject to a maximum requirement
of ten times the executive officer’s cash salary.
Unearned Compensation
Recoupment
Misconduct by an executive that contributes to the Company having to
restate all or a significant portion of its financial statements.
Extended Clawback Policy Incentive compensation was based on materially inaccurate financial
information, whether or not the executive was responsible.
Performance-Based Vesting
Conditions
Misconduct which has or might reasonably be expected to have
reputational or other harm to the Company or any conduct that constitutes
“cause.”
Misconduct or commission of a material error that causes or might be
reasonably expected to cause significant financial or reputational harm to
the Company or the executive’s business group.
Improper or grossly negligent failure, including in a supervisory capacity,
to identify, escalate, monitor or manage in a timely manner and as
reasonably expected, risks material to the Company or the executive’s
business group.
The Company or the executive’s business group suffers a material
downturn in financial performance or suffers a material failure of risk
management.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2879102
The Wells Fargo Cross-Selling Scandal
Google finance academy 12
$200
$250
$300
$350
$400
$450
Market Cap ($ billions)
Exhibit 4 — Wells Fargo: Stock Price and Market capitalization
Note: Prices of the KBW Bank Index re-indexed to coincide with Wells Fargo stock price as of September 1, 2016.
Source: Yahoo! Finance.
1. Wells Fargo announces $185 million settlement with CFPB and OCC.
2. Stumpf resigns as CEO; replaced by Sloan.
3. Wells Fargo board of directors releases report of independent investigation.
4. Wells Fargo annual meeting; 9 directors reelected with less than 75 percent support.
5. Wells Fargo discloses auto loan insurance violations; mortgage product violations.
6. Wells Fargo increases the number of potentially unauthorized consumer accounts to 3.5 million.
7. Federal Reserve imposes asset cap on Wells Fargo; the bank enters into a consent order.
8. Wells Fargo announces $1 billion settlement with CFPB and OCC.
1
2
3
4 5
6
7
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2879102
The Wells Fargo Cross-Selling Scandal
Google finance academy 13
Exhibit 5 — Independent Investigation Report: Executive Summary (Excerpts)
When the Independent Directors of the Board authorized this investigation, the purpose was to examine the root causes of
sales practice abuses and to assess how issues of corporate structure and culture as well as individual actions contributed to
the injuries inflicted upon Wells Fargo’s customers and the extraordinary damage to Wells Fargo’s brand and reputation, not
merely to determine compensation or disciplinary action. The Board did so in the spirit of lessons to be learned, to promote
accountability, to strengthen the organization and to minimize the likelihood of future occurrences. This section of the Report
summarizes the factual findings of the investigation, which are developed in greater detail in the subsequent sections. …
The Community Bank
Wells Fargo, with its successful Community Bank, had a long history of strong performance as a self-identified sales organization
with a decentralized corporate structure guided by its Vision & Values statement. While there is nothing necessarily pernicious
about sales goals, a sales-oriented culture or a decentralized corporate structure, these same cultural and structural characteristics
unfortunately coalesced and failed dramatically here. There was a growing conflict over time in the Community Bank between
Wells Fargo’s Vision & Values and the Community Bank’s emphasis on sales goals. Aided by a culture of strong deference to
management of the lines of business (embodied in the oft-repeated “run it like you own it” mantra), the Community Bank’s
senior leaders distorted the sales model and performance
management system, fostering an atmosphere that prompted low quality sales and improper and unethical behavior.
Senior management in the Community Bank had a deep-seated adherence to its sales model. The model generally called for
significant annual growth in the number of products, such as checking accounts, savings accounts and credit cards, sold each
year. Even when challenged by their regional leaders, the senior leadership of the Community Bank failed to appreciate or
accept that their sales goals were too high and becoming increasingly untenable.
Over time, even as senior regional leaders challenged and criticized the increasingly unrealistic sales goals — arguing that they
generated sales of products that customers neither needed nor used — the Community Bank’s senior management tolerated
low quality accounts as a necessary by-product of a sales-driven organization. In particular, the Community Bank’s senior
leaders were concerned that tightening up too much on quality would risk lowering sales of products that customers actively
used; and, more generally, the senior leaders were reluctant to take steps that they believed might have a negative impact on the
Community Bank’s financial performance. They also failed to adequately consider that low quality accounts could be indicative
of unauthorized accounts. …
To assist the investigation, Shearman & Sterling retained FTI Consulting. The firm analyzed various metrics to assist in
determining the impact of the Community Bank’s sales culture. First, it examined Wells Fargo’s investigations data for allegations
of sales integrity violations and associated terminations and resignations. And second, it analyzed information relating to the
rate at which the Community Bank’s customers were funding — that is, making initial deposits into — new checking and
savings accounts. While there can be many reasons a customer might not fund an account, lower funding rates (the proportion
of new accounts with more than de minimis deposits) suggest that some customers were sold accounts that they may not have
wanted or needed.
Trends in the data show, perhaps not surprisingly, that as sales goals became harder to achieve, the number of allegations
and terminations increased and the quality of accounts declined. Thus, the number of sales integrity-related allegations and
associated terminations and resignations increased relatively steadily from the second quarter of 2007 and both peaked in the
fourth quarter of 2013, when a newspaper article brought to light improper sales practices in Los Angeles. After the Community
Bank and the corporate control functions started to focus more resources and attention on the problem and the growth of sales
goals moderated somewhat starting in 2013, the number of sales integrity-related allegations and associated terminations and
resignations steadily fell.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2879102
The Wells Fargo Cross-Selling Scandal
Google finance academy 14
Exhibit 5 — continued
This was mirrored by the funding rate. It dropped steadily, from approximately 90% in 2005 to below 80% in 2012; it then rose
somewhat in 2013, continued climbing thereafter, and exceeded 95% by 2016, paralleling Wells Fargo’s increasing focus on sales
practices after 2013.
As reflected in the reduction in plan sales goals for 2013, while the Community Bank did take steps over time to address issues
associated with sales practice violations and aggressive sales goals, those steps were incremental, implemented slowly and
insufficientto address the root cause of the problem. There was a disinclination among the Community Bank’s senior leadership,
regardless of the scope of improper behavior or the number of terminated employees, to see the problem as systemic. It was
common to blame employees who violated Wells Fargo’s rules without analyzing what caused or motivated them to do so. …
In addition, keeping the sales model intact and sales growing meant that the Community Bank’s performance management
system had to exert significant, and in some cases extreme, pressure on employees to meet or exceed their goals. Many
employees felt that failing to meet sales goals could (and sometimes did) result in termination or career-hindering criticism
by their supervisors. Employees who engaged in misconduct most frequently associated their behavior with sales pressure,
rather than compensation incentives, although the latter contributed to problematic behavior by over-weighting sales as against
customer service or other factors. Conversely, employees saw that the individuals most likely to be praised, rewarded and held
out as models for success were high sales performers. …
The Community Bank identified itself as a sales organization, like department or retail stores, rather than a service-oriented
financial institution. This provided justification for a relentless focus on sales, abbreviated training and high employee turnover.
Wells Fargo’s decentralized organizational structure and the deference paid to the lines of business contributed to the persistence
of this environment. Carrie Tolstedt and certain of her inner circle were insular and defensive and did not like to be challenged
or hear negative information. Even senior leaders within the Community Bank were frequently afraid of or discouraged from
airing contrary views. Tolstedt effectively challenged and resisted scrutiny both from within and outside the Community Bank.
She and her group risk officer not only failed to escalate issues outside the Community Bank, but also worked to impede such
escalation, including by keeping from the Board information regarding the number of employees terminated for sales practice
violations. Although they likely did so to give themselves freedom to address these issues on their own terms, rather than to
encourage improper behavior, the dire consequences and cost to Wells Fargo are the same. …
Senior Management
John Stumpf
… After decades of success, Stumpf was Wells Fargo’s principal proponent and champion of the decentralized business model
and of cross-sell and the sales culture. His commitment to them colored his response when sales practice issues became more
prominent in 2013 and subsequent years and led him to stand back and rely on the Community Bank to fix the problem, even in
the face of growing indications that the situation was worsening and threatened substantial reputational harm to Wells Fargo.
Because it was the responsibility of Community Bank leadership to run the business “like they owned it,” Stumpf did not engage
in investigation and critical analysis to fully understand the problem. And, as discussed below, the corporate control functions
that reported to him and upon which he relied were similarly constrained by Wells Fargo’s decentralized model.
Stumpf’s commitment to the sales culture also led him to minimize problems with it, even when plausibly brought to his
attention. Stumpf was by nature an optimistic executive who refused to believe that the sales model was seriously impaired. His
reaction invariably was that a few bad employees were causing issues, but that the overwhelming majority of employees were
behaving properly. He was too late and too slow to call for inspection of or critical challenge to the basic business model.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2879102
The Wells Fargo Cross-Selling Scandal
Google finance academy 15
Exhibit 5 — continued
Stumpf’s long-standing working relationship with Tolstedt influenced his judgment as well. Tolstedt reported to Stumpf until
late 2015 and he admired her as a banker and for the contributions she made to the Community Bank over many years. At the
same time, he was aware that many doubted that she remained the right person to lead the Community Bank in the face of sales
practice revelations, including the Board’s lead independent director and the head of its Risk Committee. Stumpf nonetheless
moved too slowly to address the management issue. …
Corporate Control Organizations
Sections of the Report below describe how Wells Fargo control functions, specifically Corporate Risk, the Law Department,
Human Resources, Internal Investigations and Audit, dealt with sales practice issues in the Community Bank. Several common
themes — again, substantially related to Wells Fargo’s culture and structure — hampered the ability of these organizations to
effectively analyze, size and escalate sales practice issues.
First, Wells Fargo’s decentralized organizational structure meant that centralized functions had parallel units in the Community
Bank, which impeded corporate-level insight into and influence over the Community Bank. Historically, the risk function at
Wells Fargo was highly decentralized. The line of business risk managers were answerable principally to the heads of their
businesses and yet took the lead in assessing and addressing risk within their business units. The Risk Committee of the Board,
consisting of the chairs of all the Board’s standing committees, was created in 2011 to oversee risk across the enterprise. This
involved a multi-year plan starting in 2013 to substantially grow Corporate Risk, to move toward centralization of more risk
functions and to enhance Corporate Risk’s ability to oversee the management of risk in the lines of business. Consistent with
this plan, the Board supported major funding increases for Corporate Risk for 2014-2016. But, as problems with sales practices
in the Community Bank became more apparent in 2013-2015, Corporate Risk was still a work in progress and the Chief Risk
Officer had limited authority with respect to the Community Bank. As events were unfolding, his visibility into risk issues at
the Community Bank was hampered by his dependence on its group risk officer and he was essentially confined to attempting
to cajole and persuade Tolstedt and the Community Bank to be more responsive to sales practice-related risks.
Similarly, the decentralized structure of Human Resources contributed to a lack of visibility into the scope and nature of sales
practice problems. Almost all sales integrity cases and issues touched upon some facet of the HR function, including with
respect to employee terminations, hiring, training, coaching, discipline, incentive compensation, performance management,
turnover, morale, work environment, claims and litigations. Despite this, there was no coordinated effort by HR, either within
the Community Bank or in Corporate HR, to track, analyze or report on sales practice issues.
The fragmentation and decentralization of control functions needs to be and is being addressed. …
Second, and relatedly, the culture of substantial deference accorded to the lines of business carried over into the control
functions. Even when senior executives came to recognize that sales practice issues within the Community Bank were a serious
problem or were not being addressed timely and sufficiently, they relied on Tolstedt and her senior managers to carry out
corrective actions. This culture of deference was particularly powerful in this instance since Tolstedt was respected for her
historical success at the Community Bank, was perceived to have strong support from the CEO and was notoriously resistant
to outside intervention and oversight.
Third, certain of the control functions often adopted a narrow “transactional” approach to issues as they arose. They focused
on the specific employee complaint or individual lawsuit that was before them, missing opportunities to put them together in a
way that might have revealed sales practice problems to be more significant and systemic than was appreciated. As an example,
while HR had a great deal of information recorded in its systems, it had not developed the means to consolidate information on
sales practice issues and to report on them.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2879102
The Wells Fargo Cross-Selling Scandal
Google finance academy 16
Exhibit 5 — continued
Source: Independent Director of the Board of Wells Fargo & Company: Sales Practices Investigation Report, (April 10, 2017).
Similarly, attorneys in the Law Department’s Employment Section had visibility into the scope and causes of sales practice
misconduct and in fact made commendable attempts to address it through, among other things, work on various committees.
However, the Law Department, particularly at its senior levels, did not discuss or appreciate the seriousness and scale of sales
practice issues within the Community Bank or fully consider whether there might be a pattern of illegal conduct involved.
Rather, the Department’s focus was on advising on discrete legal problems as they arose and on managing Wells Fargo’s exposure
to specific litigation risks.
The same holds true for Audit. Audit reviewed relevant controls and processes and largely found them to be effective; however,
while it had access to information regarding sales practice concerns, it did not view its role to include analyzing more broadly
the root cause of improper conduct.
Finally, until as late as 2015, even as sales practices were labeled a “high risk” in materials provided to the Risk Committee of
the Board, there was a general perception within Wells Fargo’s control functions that sales practice abuses were a problem
of relatively modest significance, the equivalent of a tolerable number of minor infractions or victimless crimes. This under
reaction to sales practice issues resulted in part from the incorrect belief, extending well into 2015, that improper practices did
not cause any “customer harm”; and “customer harm” itself was narrowly construed to mean only financial harm such as fees
and penalties. This flawed perspective made it easy to undervalue the risk to Wells Fargo’s brand and reputation arising from
the misuse of customer information and the breaches of trust occasioned by
improper sales practices. …
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2879102